PREFACE
I HAVE A PHOTOGRAPH of my mother on a rock ledge over water somewhere in the mountains. Basalt rings the lake. My mother stands naked at the edge of the precipice looking across desert, arms around her pregnant belly, as water scatters sun.
A century before, the writer Mary Austin caught a split second of sublimity, before loss, before trouble, when she walked one morning on a windblown hill and stood at the foot of a walnut tree. Suddenly earth and grass and tree and sky and her child self "came alive together with a pulsing light of consciousness."
She remembers the foxglove at her feet, a lingering bee, the "swift, inclusive awareness of each for the whole—I in them and they in me, and all of us enclosed in a warm lucent bubble of livingness."
And I remember the night I wandered with my mother in full moon up Mountain View Drive, when we threw off our clothes and walked in only our hiking shoes, me a child and her cutting the waters before me, as if she could ferry me to safety, and for a while she could, and she did.
THE VALLEY LAY DRY that winter, and wind roared over the mountains.
February 2015 marked the fourth year of bad drought in California, the worst in more than a millennium, and the jet stream raced over the Sierra Nevada range and hit the floor of Owens Valley as it usually does a few times a month in winter. But on the afternoon of Friday, February 6, the wind moved with enough force to strain the wires draped between the old power poles that stretch along the base of the mountains. Maybe these wires swung like heavy jump ropes. Maybe the wind knocked a branch across a weak point. Regardless, just before 2 p.m., a wire broke and sparks trailed through the dry brush, there on the floor of the valley, fourteen miles from the little hospital where I was born.
Owens Valley is part of the region we call the Eastern Sierra, or the East Side. This valley is high desert, a long brown sliver of sagebrush and bitterbrush cupped between ranges—to the west, the stark granite escarpment of the Sierra Nevada, casting its rain shadow across our towns; to the east, the Whites and Inyos, those ancient desert mountains, rippled

and purple—rising two vertical miles, over fourteen thousand feet at the highest peak. Fire, drought, flood, and blizzard visit the Eastern Sierra oftene Perhaps this is why the nearest place with a population over thirty thousand is two hundred miles away.
Just northwest of Owens Valley, here on the East Side, Mammoth Mountain spits steam and rumbles with a belly full of magma. The wind knocks big-rig trucks over regularly. In our living room a scorpion once stung Mom's toe, and black widow spiders lived in the wooden frame of our old hot tub. Our neighbors' dogs died from the bites of rattlesnakes, and their cats died in the mouths of coyotes and mountain lions. Our neighbors themselves fell from cliff faces and froze in immense, immovable snow. Some crashed airplanes into mountains during storms. Others lost themselves in the desert without water.
Annual rainfall in the Owens Valley town of Bishop averages five inches and in drought years measures closer to zero. And so the brush that covers the valley is always dry, but that February it was drier still. Usually snow lies over the mountains, but lately the days had been eerily warm, and snowpack was at a record low. My gardener grandfather on the central coast of California fretted about his yellow pasture. In Bishop, my father—jack-of-all-trades with hands like leather, split fingertips wrapped in duct tape, wrinkles on his cheeks like scars—told me that even in February he was working outdoors in a T-shirt beneath the sky-pricking point of Mount Tom and the long gray line of Wheeler Crest.

My father saw the fire when it was still small. He drove north from Bishop toward the stone wall of the mountains, toward our old neighborhood, Swall Meadows. He did not drive to investigate the fire but to do some work on the place, to split some kindling he'd harvested on the side of Wheeler Crest. As he drove, he saw smoke rising and had to detour around a cottonwood the wind had knocked across the road—the wind blew a steady fifty miles per hour with stronger gusts, shifting directions, throwing dust, whipping brush. At that time, the fire had just been called in, and a crew of volunteer firefighters swarmed around it. A small brush burn, my father thought, and continued up the mountain.
On that February afternoon I didn't yet know how the ground becomes naked where fire passes over, how tree trunks cake in their own blackened bark and clumps of boulders lie bare and singed in the sand. Though I was halfway across the country, a graduate student in snow-crusted Minnesota, from my father's telling I could imagine what he saw. After all, I am always thinking of home.
BEFORE THAT FRIDAY Swall Meadows consisted of about 120 houses and two hundred people tossed across the steep east-facing wall of Wheeler Crest, surrounded for miles by sagebrush and ragweed and desert peach. In Swall Meadows there are no streetlights and no sidewalks—no need for streetlights with so many stars and no need for sidewalks with so few cars—and every road slopes and sloughs down the mountain, eroding before our eyes. Here, the house where I grew up rests on Mountain View Drive, well up the incline

of the Sierra Nevada, seven thousand feet above sea level and three thousand feet—a thirty-minute drive—above the nearest town of Bishop. To get to Bishop, follow an old wagon route, paved over now, that swoops and wriggles through  pinyons and crumbled piles of pale volcanic rock, a road so unruly in its curls and curves that as you drive you see the  green patch of town twenty miles down, then the wall of Wheeler, then you spin again to the rising bulk of Mount Tom, shifting shape and shade and expression.
These days my father lives in a house on the outskirts of Bishop. Swall Meadows is just too isolated, he says, for a person alone. But the house in Swall where we grew up was not a place you left behind all at once, and his tools still cluttered  the garage. Sometimes he rented out the rooms to vacationers,  and sometimes the rooms sat empty. The house rested on the mountain, neighbors on all sides within shouting distance but farther than I could toss a stone, its long driveway narrow and unpaved, and around it grew blue spruce, aspen, cottonwood, Jeffrey pine, apple trees. Below the house the mountainside swooped into an acre of brush, a woodpile, and a shed where  my father and brother once kept dirt bikes. From the living room big windows gazed over the valley and at night revealed Bishop far below, a patch of streetlights in a great darkness.
 The house was sided in redwood. It had a wooden porch,  where I used to get splinters and carve my name, and a corrugated sheet metal roof I climbed in summer. In the cement steps that led down the mountain to the little apple orchard were imprints pressed by my sister, my brother, and me when our hands were small. In the bedroom downstairs, where

my mother died when I was sixteen, a window overlooked the ridge of Wheeler and, beyond that, the perfect pinnacle of Tom.
FIRE HAPPENS OFTEN in California during summer, the driest months. Strange, my father thought, to see smoke over the valley in February. But this was a drought winter, absent of the snow that usually covers Swall Meadows and stops just above the Owens Valley floor. My father parked the pickup outside our house beside the rounds of wood he had chainsawed and rolled into a trailer when a pine fell, and he split logs for an hour until the sheriff, Joe, came by and said everyone in Swall had to evacuate, that there was a fire seven miles down the mountain and no one knew which direction it would go.
Pop told Joe, "One more minute, I've just gotta grab some kindling," and Joe chuckled and said hurry up. My father went into our house and gathered the photo albums and some jackets from the closet in the mudroom, passing by the painting of two trees leaning into each other over a stream, the wooden salad bowls that were a wedding present, the stacked cassettes of flute and fiddle music—Joni Mitchell, Cat Stevens—that my mother had loved. He threw the jackets and the photo albums on the backseat of the truck and he drove down the mountain.
He didn't really believe Swall Meadows would burn.
He'd planned to move the photo albums to his house in Bishop anyway; otherwise, he might not have grabbed even those. Had he believed the house would burn, he would have

called me before he was already back in Bishop, watching the mountainside from the valley floor. Had he called me sooner, I would have told him to get my mother's T-shirt printed with wildflowers, take the pictures off the walls, save the soft toy frog she gave me when I was small.
The wind became more and more a wild thing as the sun moved west toward the ridge of Wheeler Crest. In Owens Valley the wind gusted to seventy miles per hour, to ninety, to one hundred, shoving cars across the highway and pitting windshields with blown sand.
Anyone who lives in the Eastern Sierra knows this wind and its moods. On the beaches of the Pacific, gusts arrive laden with salt spray, whooshing with enough force to make  your eyes water, a persistence perfect for launching kites. By Oil* [y the time that breeze reaches Owens Valley, it has raced over the coastal range, up the western, windward flank of the Sierra Nevada, and it has turned powerful. Dust devils tear up the dry surface of what was once Owens Lake, tossing toxic particles miles into the sky, into the lungs of the people who live near the old shoreline. The wind blows from the west over the mountains, and the willows along the river lean east. It scatters pollen in a golden film over backyard ponds. It stretches curtains across bedrooms.
When a cold front moves off the Pacific, wind hurtles over the crest of the Sierra Nevada faster than a hurricane. In Bishop it splinters pine boughs, shatters windows, breaks the little airport's wind speed indicator. Wind this wild is called the Sierra Wave, and it tumbles over the valley like a wave breaking. I have hiked on a day when the Sierra Wave 9 pummeled the sky, have leaned into a gale so strong it negates the work of gravity and I can almost lie down on air, can fall forward without really falling. I have found myself caught in a canyon when the Jeffrey pines above me thrashed their branches like furious giants and the Wave hurled stones and pine cones and I ran for my car.
While my father drove south toward Bishop, this wind fanned what was no longer a small brushfire up the mountain.
AT 7 P.M., fifteen members of the Wheeler Crest Volunteer Fire Department drove to the little station in Swall Meadows and changed into structure protection gear, which is heavy and built to withstand heat and smoke. The youngest of the fire crew was in his forties, the rest past retirement. The volunteers drank some water and left the station. Fire reached
over the blacktop and around their tires. They drove through a river of flame.
My father stood in the desert on the outskirts of Bishop. Even from twenty miles away, to look directly at the burning flank of Wheeler Crest hurt his eyes. The gale knocked him to his knees. He watched to make sure the wind didn't turn, because a fire line like this could whip through Bishop and torch everything—his house; the mobile home where my brother lived with his girlfriend and dogs; Great Basin Bakery; the mountaineering stores; the whitewashed Methodist church where a man named Caddy presided every Sunday; and the two-bedroom house on which I had made a down payment a month before, on Keough Street, its roof shaded by the long white boughs of a liquidambar.

 engineer, except that he dredged an entire wrought-iron stairBut the wind did not turn toward Bishop. It blew up the case from a hydroelectric plant on the bottom of Owens River mountain, tipping bare willows in the direction of Swall Gorge, which now spirals into our basement. He designed a Meadows like pointing arms, and as soon as it became clear what would burn tonight, my father got in his truck and drove. He parked at the sheriff's roadblock near the base of the I from old-growth redwood, the cores of trees, rot-resistant mountains and tried to calculate how high the flames had heartwood salvaged from enormous tanks that once held climbed. The wind blew his hair and pressed his flannel shirt water for Los Angeles 250 miles south. He built a greenhouse against his shoulders. In the early dark he could not make out and a sloping metal roof to shed snow and framed six exterior the house of his friends Dan and Linda, who were traveling doors, none of which have ever, as far as I know, been fitted and had asked him to send news, and he could not make out with a key, and he affixed those rambling walls to a steep part our redwood house where it sat higher up Wheeler Crest, just of the mountain at the end of that long dirt driveway. This was below a row of towering Jeffrey pines. What he could see was every tree, everything that could burn, burning. Pop watched the mountain burn. And he remembered buyThe big spots were houses, glowing longer than trees, ing the house with my mother after the engineer left Swall black pillars rising from the roofs. The frames lit up as if by Meadows, after the place had begun to crumble in the slow x-ray, and the windows blazed. Dan and Linda had a natural way of a dry country. My parents pulled desiccated birds from wood house, like ours. Amid darkness and whipping flames, the radiators. Their friend fell through the half-finished floor it was impossible to tell one from another, impossible to know of the second story and landed in a heap in the living room. what the firefighters might save. Outside on the bare mountain, my father planted saplings.
What my father heard: the wind shrieking in the bare cot- Now he breathed smoke and pictured the piano, the beds, tonwoods along the creek that ran up the mountain and into the curtains, as I did, burning. The dried roses from a high the fire. Then voices from the scanners of the officers man- school boyfriend resting in a vase, heads tipped toward the ning the roadblock, chewed with static: firefighters withdraw- ground. The bedroom window, glass melting my view of ing, the community of Swall Meadows fully engulfed. Wheeler and Mount Tom. The little model airplane Pop and
I built together, still sitting on my desk. Mismatched couches, DECADES BEFORE I was born, a retired engineer from one green, one purple, one upholstered in fabric printed with the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power built the red- maps, chosen by my father because it is his job to map these wood house on Mountain View Drive. I know little about this

mountains. The cherrywood cabinet he'd gotten from a carpenter in exchange for a ride in his hot air balloon. Those wide windows overlooking the valley.
When houses burn, embers lodge in doormats, in pine needles on the ground, in leaves in roof gutters, in vents without screens. Heat breaks windows and flames enter. Second floors collapse and rafters fall. Softwood—redwood, cedar, pine—burns faster than hardwood. A house reduced to ash has burned for hours.
I took a red-eye flight home to California and met my father at his house in Bishop. All night he woke with thoughts of objects left behind, the smallest things, a lifetime's accumulation of tools. "I really couldn't sleep last night," he told me. "I kept thinking, Shoot, I should have grabbed my drill. I need my drill to put up a fence."
Saturday morning, near sunrise, a neighbor on the volunteer fire department got into Swall Meadows before the evacuation order was lifted and drove the streets. There are not many streets in Swall Meadows to drive. The neighbor tried to match faces with the houses that were gone.
His daughter called me. She had been my classmate; how many afternoons had she walked Mountain View Drive to sit on my bedroom floor and listen to the bands we loved? Still there, she said tearfully, of her own house with its wooden porch, though the cabin across the street was a lone stone chimney. And what about the redwood house, standing on the brush-covered hillside below the line of guardian pines?
Her father had snapped a photo: a neighbor's new cabin, gleaming pine, which had perched just above ours, was ash and buckled sheet metal. In the distance, hazy with smoke, our roof rose unharmed.
WHEN LINDA SAW me for the first time, the day we were allowed back into Swall and one by one cars rolled up the mountain, she hugged me for minutes, her standing knee deep in what was once her foundation, me bending over to grip her under the arms. Two firefighters looked away.
Our neighbor Linda is sixty years old, small and blonde and pretty. Her kids went through school with my brother and sister and me. On winter breaks her daughter Jessie ice skates with us on frozen ponds; we talk about how much we miss home when we are far away. Through sifting ash I learned the contents of this family's life, more through memories than what could be reclaimed.
Linda stepped back from my arms and looked behind her. She wore a stranger's clothes, her hair mussed under a baseball cap, her face dusted with ash. She pointed to the charred metal of what I realized were a washer and dryer, to the skeleton of her little red car, melted glass sloshed over its doors. A stone wall that had been the garage squared off against the mountain.
"Look at it," she said, tears cutting tracks down the gray of her cheeks. The firefighters stirred the ash with the toes of their boots and looked at the ground. They were young men, sent by Cal Fire from the city of Bakersfield, four hours away. Now they paused to crouch in the ash in their yellow suits and pick out tiny warped beads. This was the first day and it hadn't yet occurred to the rest of us that a burned house is
14
toxic, and so we wore no gloves or goggles or respirators, and the white ash made a low smoke over the shattered foundation, which was really just a blueprint now, a house-shaped border marking where floor and walls had been. As we reached for handfuls of Linda's house, we brushed soil and rocks that had lain buried beneath the foundation for twenty-five years. Three days after the fire, the earth was still warm.
Leaning on her elbows in the rubble, Linda said, "It's our place in the world, our mark." The house was evidence of her family's life among mountains—planks of cedar, windows overlooking a sweep of brush to the ravine from which the flames rose, walls once surrounded by gardens, a fish pond, and trees. Now the needles of the pines were blackened, and the branches reached stiffly in the direction the wind had blown. Living fish flashed orange in sooty water as Pop splashed with a shovel to drive oxygen below.
THE LAST TIME I came home, before the fire, I helped €4 my father run his usual errands around Bishop. We rode bicycles around town and he restocked the map rack at the visitor center. Besides selling maps, he has tried just about everything you can try in the Eastern Sierra, not an easy place to make a living: mucked out the bottoms of streams, pumped gas at the little county airport, babysat, taught kids how to ski, rented out storage units, run a Greyhound office, delivered pamphlets by bicycle, run a gym, run a used car lot, built an airplane, flown a hot air balloon. On that afternoon in January, a few weeks before the fire, we picked up windshield wipers for my brother Anthony's truck and a parakeet in a
15 cardboard box for a neighbor. The parakeet went in the saddiebag on Pop's bicycle along with everything else, and we rode back to his house over root-cracked asphalt.
My father is six foot eight inches tall and gangly—a beanpole, he calls himself, who takes ballroom dance lessons and accidentally wore ladies' sunglasses for years, who gives extra money to the school district because he thinks property taxes are too low. He wears bike shorts and a flapping long-sleeved shirt and rides in an old canvas hat instead of a helmet, because up here the sun burns you in minutes. He runs into so many acquaintances it takes a half hour to pick up some hummus at Manor Market.
On one of Pop's maps, downtown Bishop is a tiny grid among the swooping lines of river, highway, wilderness boundaries, and a long steel pipeline running south. When 1 was a kid in Swall, the lights of Bishop on the valley floor met me when I woke from nightmares. You could look out the living room windows and see those lights sparkling, just a sprinkling on the black blanket of desert below. Pop grumbled about light pollution, but in the midst of darkness, Bishop
weeks before the fire, we stopped for bagels at Great Basin Bakery and ate them at a picnic table in the Bishop park as ducks swam in the creek. And then we biked to the InyoMono Title Company, where 1 sat at a small wooden table with my father and an escrow officer named Stephanie, and sun fell across the papers in front of us, and I signed for the house on Keough Street.

HERE BESIDE THE vanished southern wall, Linda's jewelry box had once rested on a dresser. We found traces of its contents scattered, as if propelled by an explosion. The house was not so much rubble as powder. The powder that was once the childhood bedrooms of Jessie and Ryan and Chris combined with the powder that was once their parents' room, and so we found fishing lures from the boys' tackle box mingled with Linda's shattered beads, a tiny white scallop from the shell collection that had lined Jessie's desk among bits of broken tile.
I cupped as much ash as I could hold in my hands and sprinkled it across a wire screen. As I shook the screen, powder lifted and swirled. The air smelled of sulfur, a smell that got into our clothes and would not wash away. I coughed. Linda coughed. We sprawled out and propped on our elbows to better study the debris, the chunks of things that snagged on the sifting screens. We were looking for a diamond from I the anniversary ring Dan gave to Linda. We were looking for anything that retained its shape.
Every shard of porcelain was precious now. "I want all of it," Linda said. "Maybe I can make something out of it." And I imagined a shrine of relics raised in a quiet corner beneath a
window, a view of Mount Tom, years from now when a new house stands inside the memory of the old.
Pop and I left Dan and Linda and turned up Mountain View Drive. In our own driveway I saw dry leaves piled by the wooden walls. The pines were green, the spruce blue. We replaced a melted portion of drip line. This is what we lost: that thin black strip of plastic, a few patches of brush,

part of the woodpile. We threw bread and carrots onto the brown lawn for the mule deer, who picked through charcoal meadows and looked up in confusion, too stunned to recoil from cars.
I swept ash out of the doors, ash driven through cracks by the wind. A bad seal, my father said, and made a note for repair, but it seemed to me the wind could spread ash without limit. In the dirt of the driveway and snagged in the brush below the apple trees, I found bits that had drifted as houses burned: a piece of window screen, a flake from a solar panel. Upstairs I vacuumed the faded blue carpet, and this act was now a great privilege. I remembered dragging a futon across the carpet to the side of my parents' bed, where Mom let me sleep after bad dreams. One nightmare repeated: the blackened face of a dime, oversized, burned or dirty, horrible for reasons I didn't understand.
Dan and Linda will live in our house for years while they rebuild. Jessie and Ryan and Chris will stay in our bedrooms upstairs when they visit home. That day, Pop and I changed the sheets so they wouldn't smell of smoke. We printed pictures of our neighbors and put them in our frames. We put a vase of flowers on the table.
To UNDERSTAND THE place we call the Eastern Sierra, you must be able to see what is no longer here. See what hides, change your definition of big and empty and small, of good and bad. Bend and search the desert floor for the near-invisible petals of a crowned muilla and then look up to mountains that seem to rise forever. This dusty margin of California


draws and then replicates the kind of people who have never completely adjusted to a human scale. They don't quite fit other places, be it the orbit of their ideas, good and bad, or the size of the sky they require in order to carry out their lives. The author Mary Austin wandered west from Illinois in 1888, fell into the California desert, and remained for a long time. She wrote of the place, "You will find it forsaken i of most things but beauty and madness and death and God."
Mary Austin came to the Eastern Sierra in 1892. She lived in a brown house in Independence, one of the little towns strung along the highway in Owens Valley, where she wrote novels and essays and stories and plays about the strange presence of the land. As she told it, there was something about this country-—"something that rustled and ran, that hung 1 half-remotely, insistent on being noticed, fled from pursuit, and when you turned from it, leaped suddenly and fastened on your vitals."
I walked around Swall Meadows, and it was not the same.
I looked from my bedroom over the old view, the ridge of Wheeler blackened and in places still smoldering. I could not arrange myself anywhere in Swall so that my field of vision did not include evidence of fire.
But once the smoke cleared from the valley, the days after the burn were perfect blue and warm. We were first evacuated from Swall when I was too young to remember much besides snow lying over the mountain and burying our driveway, my father pushing the snowblower, a plume drifting over his shoulder like the tail of a white bird. That February, twenty years ago, we drove to Bishop in case of avalanche,

which had swept houses off foundations in decades past. An avalanche had flipped a landmark on Wheeler Crest, a hundred-ton granite boulder Pop nicknamed House Rock, so that it pointed toward the sky.
I had evacuated for wildfire before, too, but that was in July. "Beautiful country burn again," wrote the poet Robinson Jeffers in 1926, words that have become famous in California.
If the mountains are burning in February, my neighbors ask, what will summer bring? The streams that encircle Swall Meadows haven't rushed the way I remember in a while. How starkly different each season once felt. In high school I remember wet feet because I refused to wear boots. The roof over our lockers collapsed every year under snow. Lately, when I visit home in December, it seems I have traveled to a land of constant warmth, the myth of Southern California stretching north. Back in Minnesota, I tell people, "When I was home
this summer . . . , then recall it was winter.
Swall marks the border between desert and sky. Mostly the mountain is dry, the valley brown, but meadows spread to the west where my brother and sister and I used to roam. There, rose hips grow thick enough to tear denim, and a grove of water birch and willow hugs a snowmelt creek. Years ago my father discovered a clearing beneath a roof of leaves, water running over crumbled granite. Grasses on the banks were flattened by the sleeping weight of mule deer or mountain lions. We called the place the Fairy Glen, and on summer afternoons we walked there with Mom to make mud balls and grass crowns and to pan for fool's gold in the cold

20	MIRACLE 	21
The firefighter reminded me that in the past four years water. Pop bent green water birch branches into our hands,
Big Pine, a tiny town just south of Bishop, had burned once let go, and we launched twelve feet into the air. With my and been threatened by fire three times. The fire that burned friend Daniel I pulled the tailgate off an old truck burned in 1
Swall Meadows swallowed seven thousand acres in all. That's a fire in the 1980s and abandoned to the brush. We dragged the size of Bishop, including its unincorporated areas and the the tailgate to the Fairy Glen and laid it as a footbridge across
Paiute reservation. Everyone understands what the future the stream.
Daniel wrote to see if my house was okay. He promises. "But people are here," the firefighter said. "People After the fire want to stay. I'm gonna get my house back. I'm gonna get grew up thirty minutes northwest in another Eastern Sierra
	Mammoth Lakes. Now	my business back. Those meadows you're looking at—they're
town deeper in the mountains, called gonna be much greener than they were before." he lives in a wet, green place and works with trees. Sometimes
That first day, a Red Cross truck roamed the
he wants to move home. Then he thinks better of it.	streets, dis"California is gonna get really scary, I think," he said. tributing sandwiches in Styrofoam boxes that sat unopened fires in February." while Dan and Linda searched the ash. Linda did not pause "Crazy how things change in a decade . . . burn again. I told Daniel what the Fairy to eat or drink or wrap herself in something warm. The sun Beautiful country set behind Wheeler and the air chilled. My father brought a Glen looks like now: mostly gone. My hand ghostly against the blackened trunk of a water birch. jacket from our house, worn and practical—Mom's. He said, and men stand- "This is Jan's jacket. She would want it to keep you warm."
Walking the neighborhood, I saw women front of warped water heaters, half-melted Linda wrapped the jacket around herself. "My sweet Jan," ing on driveways in she said, and I looked up for that glow above the ridgeline, sewing machines, skeleton motorcycles, a spiral staircase nowhere. the one I saw when I was sixteen, when I turned to the moun-
leading
	"It's not if it's gonna happen again," a volunteer firefighter	tain to save me from grief and from fear.
Linda said, A house burned is like a death. And I wondered told me. His house, once resting beside poplar trees across had vaporized. He watched it burn as he fought what it meant to go to smoke. This land demands that you from ours, consider—makes you think you'll find an answer, but you the fire, saw flames spilling into the street as his fire truck rumbled toward his driveway—thought no—then turned his never can. And where do we turn after everything burns? back and went on to other houses. "It's not if, it's when," he What light do we find, or not find, just over the summit?
As we pulled twisted half shapes from piles of white powsaid. "It might be thirty years. We could lose twice as many der, Linda held each object in her palm like a marble. This, a next time." A pause. Smoke drifting from a hot spot on the friend gave to her in high school. This, Dan gave to her on a mountain.

22
trip to the sea. Remember, remember. We blew ash off a teacup and saucer, a ceramic boy painting at an easel, Dan's class ring. We never found the diamond, although once a piece of cut glass fooled us.
North of Linda's house, at the place where Swall Meadows and Sky Meadow Roads meet, the community bulletin board stands on two legs, a wooden slab everyone passes as they come and go, pinned with announcements like A bear in my home last night! (We don't bother to note when our cats go missing.) In the days after the fire, the bulletin board remains. Packs of dust masks and trays for sifting are stacked around its legs, and someone posts a notice for a community meeting to be held at the Wheeler Crest Fire Station.
The afternoon of the meeting is warm, even hot. Most of Swall gathers, a blackened meadow at our backs and, beyond that, the mountains. My sister, Kaela, has driven home from Santa Cruz, beads in her dreadlocks, less rattled than I somehow, a strange pattern etched into her arm with frog venom, a ritual of some significance I don't understand.
We sit under red vinyl tents and eat a Red Cross lunch. A woman in a white uniform sees me struggling to hold a ketchup bottle and takes my wobbling plate. She says, "Let me help you," her voice tender and helpless, and I think of the ash I can't wash off my hands.
The fire chief speaks. The sheriff speaks. The county supervisor speaks. My father puts a hand on my shoulder and gestures at ravens riding thermals, circling against Wheeler Crest.
A small wind rises, billowing the tents, and people reach to trap paper plates. The volunteer fire department wear navy
	MIRACLE COUNTRY	23
blue hats and collared shirts embroidered in gold, and they are called to stand while everyone cheers. And then a woman takes the microphone and asks that we rise and hold the hand of the person next to us as she reads the names of the peopie whose houses burned and the names of the streets where those houses once stood.
valley View. Rimrock. Pine. The wind moves softly like something alive, and I think of the stories of people driving past the roadblock, evading the sheriff, throwing goats, dogs, cats into cars. I think of the man with a coop of chickens who stayed as long as he could, cutting brush away from his door, who heard a whistling and turned to see a tornado of flame, watched it touch down and rise, touch down and rise. I think of the man who could not get his horse in a trailer and so walked her back and forth around patches of burning grass until finally he had to let her go and drive away.
Late on the night of the fire, my brother told Pop he was going to save our house. He could get into Swall the back way on an unpaved road where the two of them once rode dirt bikes together for countless hours, even during the bad years, when Pop was a newly single parent and Anthony was pure cooked-down rage. They both knew that road, how it led from the highway through pinyons and Jeffrey pines, pitching and falling over the base of Wheeler, and let out near Mountain View Drive.
"Anthony, no," my father said. "Do not. This isn't like other fires. The wind is too strong.
"I'm going," said my brother, and later his girlfriend told me she begged him to stay. He drove the dirt road in the

24
dark in his Chevy pickup, two-wheel drive. And then he saw the fire, saw it moving through the pines, hopping between stands of brush, this fire that had raced up the mountain at what might have been fifteen miles per hour. He tried to turn around. His wheels sank in sand and spun. The fire advanced. Ili My brother got out and ran.
Later, in the bright living room of his mobile home in Bishop, dogs running in and out of open doors, he sat on his couch and told me he'd never been so terrified in all his twenty years of life. His brindle pit bull, Bear, rolled on the carpet. On a bookcase a picture of Mom stood; in it she wears her green jacket, and a tiny Anthony leans into her, as if out of the wind. "I could feel the heat," my brother said. "I was choking on the smoke. The wind kept knocking me down,"
I don't know what he thought of as he drove up the highway and turned onto that dirt road or what he planned to do once he got to Swall. Sometimes there is just the impulse to return.
The firefighters gathered before the red tents, and behind us the mountains glowed. For now, there is the horse that found its way to a safe patch of meadow, the cat coaxed from a rock pile, paws lightly burned. The toy frog sits on my bed and regards the ridge of Wheeler with sad glass eyes. And the wind blows from the west, from the ocean and over the coastal range until it whistles in the peaks above our heads, troubling a clear sky.
2. Search and Rescue
UR PARENTS LEARNED OF Mom's diagnosis with a rare autoimmune disease when I was six years old and Kaela five and Anthony not yet ours. They did not know if, or when, the disease would turn to cancer and kill her, but they knew it could. They chose not to tell us this possibility until, when I was sixteen, and Kaela fourteen, and Anthony eleven, the cancer diagnosis was handed down by the specialists in San Francisco. Perhaps they decided we would live enough years with fear. And so they separated fear from caution, making caution an ingredient for joy.
Every family cultivates a culture and lives by its own strangeness until the strangeness turns normal and the rest of the world looks a little off. The Atleework children are alone in the world with this name because our parents made it up. Who needs a hyphen? Robert Atlee met Jan Work and there you have it. Our parents kept their respective last names, making us the only three. We're difficult to pronounce—AT-lee-work, somehow endlessly bungled—and embarrassingly easy to look up online. We got to know life without television, our only radio the valley's beloved country-western, thirty minutes

"Ambitious, beautiful . . . Atleework's remarkable prose renders the ordinary wondrous."
—Publishers Weekly (starred review)
endra Atleework grew up in Swall Meadows, in the Owens Valley of the Eastern
Sierra Nevada, where annual rainfall averages five inches and in drought years measures closer to zero.
Her parents taught their children to thrive in this beautiful if harsh landscape prone to wildfires, blizzards, and gale-force winds. Above all, the Atleework children were raised on unconditional love and delight in the natural world. But when Kendra's mother died when Kendra was iust sixteen, her once-beloved desert world came to feel empty and hostile, as climate change, drought, and wildfires intensified. The Atleework family fell apart, even as her father tried to keep them together. Kendra escaped to Los Angeles, and then Minneapolis, land of tall trees, full lakes, water everywhere you look.
But after years of avoiding her troubled hometown, she felt pulled back. Miracle Country is a moving and unforgettable memoir of flight and return, emptiness and bounty, the realities of a harsh and changing climate, and the true meaning of home. For readers of Cheryl Strayed, Terry Tempest Williams, and Rebecca Solnit, this is a breathtaking debut by a remarkable writer.
"Kendra Atleework is that rare writer—capable of heart-stopping memoir while performing a work of keen observation and serious history. A work of stunning acuity and candor, essential reading, already a classic narrative."
—Patricia Hampl, author of The Art of the Wasted Day
.!'Few writers manage to capture the essence of the California that exists beyond the images typically offered up by film and television . . . Atleework's assertive love letter to this geography paints a vivid picture of a place, and a family, that has weathered countless storms, fires, and cataclysms both large and small .	Its elegant prose, deftly balanced narrative, and careful research are sure to make readers fall in love with Miracle Country."
—Los Angeles Review of Books
"Can a book be both radiant with light and shadowy as midnight?
Miracle Country can . . . Kendrc Atleework can really write. She flies with burning wings." —Luis Alberto Urrea, author of The House of Broken Angels
INCLUDES DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Cover images: Sunset over the Sierra Nevada, Mimi Ditc ie Photogqaphy /	Cover design by Catherine Schott
Getty Images; Hot air balloon collection, Bodor Tivadaq Shutterst6ck; Fiery orange sunset sky, sangkhom sangkakam I Shutterstoelé, photo of at-i010r and her father by Sylvie Bishop NONFICTION $16.95 U.s.
ALGONQUIN BOOKS	ISBN 978-1-64375-141-2
Bookland EAN a division ofWorkman Publishing
225 Varick Street, New 06-1<, NY 1001-4e -	5 1 6 9 5

-www.al on
"+rinted irv the USA.	9 781643 751412
